Indeed, your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in six days and then established Himself above the Throne, arranging the matter [of His creation]. There is no intercessor except after His permission. That is Allah, your Lord, so worship Him. Then will you not remember?
To Him is your return all together. [It is] the promise of Allah [which is] truth. Indeed, He begins the [process of] creation and then repeats it that He may reward those who have believed and done righteous deeds, in justice. But those who disbelieved will have a drink of scalding water and a painful punishment for what they used to deny.
It is He who made the sun a shining light and the moon a derived light and determined for it phases - that you may know the number of years and account [of time]. Allah has not created this except in truth. He details the signs for a people who know.
Indeed, in the alternation of the night and the day and [in] what Allah has created in the heavens and the earth are signs for a people who fear Allah.
Indeed, those who do not expect the meeting with Us
and are satisfied with the life of this world
and feel secure therein
and those who are heedless of Our signs -
For those their refuge will be the Fire
because of what they used to earn.
Indeed, those who have believed
and done righteous deeds -
their Lord will guide them
because of their faith.
Beneath them rivers will flow
in the Gardens of Pleasure.
Their call therein will be,
"Exalted are You, O Allah,"
and their greeting therein will be,
"Peace."
And the last of their call will be,
"Praise to Allah, Lord of the worlds!"
And if Allah was to hasten for the people the evil [they invoke] as He hastens for them the good, their term would have been ended for them. But We leave the ones who do not expect the meeting with Us, in their transgression, wandering blindly.
And when affliction touches man, he calls upon Us, whether lying on his side or sitting or standing; but when We remove from him his affliction, he continues [in disobedience] as if he had never called upon Us to [remove] an affliction that touched him. Thus is made pleasing to the transgressors that which they have been doing.
And We had already destroyed generations before you when they wronged, and their messengers had come to them with clear proofs, but they were not to believe. Thus do We recompense the criminal people.
Then We made you successors in the land after them so that We may observe how you will do.
And when Our verses are recited to them as clear evidences, those who do not expect the meeting with Us say, "Bring us a Qur’ān other than this or change it." Say, [O Muhammad], "It is not for me to change it on my own accord. I only follow what is revealed to me. Indeed I fear, if I should disobey my Lord, the punishment of a tremendous Day."
Say, "If Allah had willed, I would not have recited it to you, nor would He have made it known to you, for I had remained among you a lifetime before it. Then will you not reason?"
So who is more unjust
than he who invents a lie about Allah
or denies His signs?
Indeed, the criminals will not succeed.
And they worship other than Allah
that which neither harms them
nor benefits them,
and they say,
"These are our intercessors with Allah."
Say, "Do you inform Allah of something He does not know
in the heavens or on the earth?"
Exalted is He and high above what they associate with Him.
And mankind was not but one community [united in religion],
but [then] they differed.
And if not for a word that preceded from your Lord,
it would have been judged between them [immediately]
concerning that over which they differ.
And they say,
"Why is a sign not sent down to him from his Lord?"
So say, "The unseen is only for Allah [to administer],
so wait;
indeed, I am with you among those who wait."
And when We give the people a taste of mercy after adversity has touched them, at once they conspire against Our verses. Say, "Allah is swifter in strategy." Indeed, Our messengers [i.e., angels] record that which you conspire.
It is He who enables you to travel on land and sea until, when you are in ships and they sail with them by a good wind and they rejoice therein, there comes a storm wind and the waves come upon them from every place and they expect to be engulfed, they supplicate Allah, sincere to Him in religion, "If You should save us from this, we will surely be among the thankful."
But when He saves them, at once they commit injustice upon the earth without right. O mankind, your injustice is only against yourselves, [being merely] the enjoyment of worldly life. Then to Us is your return, and We will inform you of what you used to do.
The example of [this] worldly life is but like rain which We have sent down from the sky that the plants of the earth absorb - [those] from which men and livestock eat - until, when the earth has taken on its adornment and is beautified and its people suppose that they have capability over it, there comes to it Our command by night or by day, and We make it as a harvest, as if it had not flourished yesterday. Thus do We explain in detail the signs for a people who give thought.
And Allah invites to the Home of Peace [i.e., Paradise] and guides whom He wills to a straight path.